---
layout: page
permalink: /publications/
title: publications
# description: publications by categories in reversed chronological order. generated by jekyll-scholar.
nav: true
nav_order: 2
---

During my PhD studies, I developed techniques to model small and high dimensional multimodal datasets (i.e. large p, small n). Specifically, custom graph neural networks and explainable AI techniques were created to derive connectome-based disease biomarkers (i.e. brain regions/connections affected by diseases). Our techniques go beyond existing class-wide approaches by producing **individualised** and **subgroup-specific insights** that would be more clinically relevant than existing solutions. Along the way, we proposed solutions to address problems such as inter-site variability, disease heterogeneity and multimodal fusion.

The next stage of my research is focused on the **robustness** of these explanations. Most existing studies do not robustly evaluate the salient features highlighted by their algorithms. However, doing so is key towards improving our understanding of neurological disorders. Many obstacles exist, including problems related to data quality (e.g. there's no agreement on the best fMRI preprocessing pipeline), the perception that neural networks are black boxes and the limited repertoire of tools we have to evaluate explainable AI techniques. We're actively working on this and if you are keen to collaborate, do send me an email! :)

Beyond connectomes, I have also worked on anatomical brain imaging (i.e. lesion / tissue segmentation) and more pragmatic forms of vision-language models for radiology AI applications. More details will be shared here at a more appropriate time.

<!-- _pages/publications.md -->
<div class="publications">

{% bibliography %}

</div>
