---
title: "Semi-supervised learning with data harmonisation
for biomarker discovery from resting state fMRI"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/2022-09-13-shred
excerpt: ''
date: 2022-09-12
venue: 'MICCAI'
paperurl: 'https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-16431-6_42'
citation: (tbc)
---

**tl;dr**

Many research and medical institutions collect data to study neurological disorders / neurodegenerative diseases, but such datasets collected at individual sites tend to be small.
On the other hand, many of these disorders (such as ASD and ADHD) are understood to be complex and heterogeneous: it is possible that the development process of the disorder varies across factors such as age, gender or race.
This makes such disorders difficult to study as studies performed on each site might produce contradictory findings, making the goal of producing generalisable treatments elusive.

In the face of these issues, there are several possible lines of research currently conducted:

1. Site-specific biomarkers: Delving deeper into the disease for a specific population (which would be of interest to researchers from there).
2. Site-invariant biomarkers: Finding ways to discover generalisable, site-invariant biomarkers (which would be of interest to an multinational pharmaceutical company).

In this work, we show that:
- Even if models 'overfit' on small individual datasets, there is still value in such models as they could provide site-specific biomarkers. In the first place, generalisation ability is unlikely to be the main focus in such studies so overfitting should not be a reason to abandon the model altogether. That said, work still has to be done to determine whether the biomarkers provide valuable signals, or might have captured 'noise' (features that indeed were useful for the model to perform classification in that data subset, but do not end up becoming useful biomarkers).
- While the most intuitive way to arrive at site-invariant biomarkers is to pool data from multiple sites together (like what is currently done in many data consortiums), this needs to be done carefully. If imbalances exist across sites, biomarkers produced could be biased towards the largest site - i.e. the biomarkers are not as generalised as one might have assumed.
- We propose a technique to separate site-invariant biomarkers from site-specific ones, making it possible to pursue both types of studies from existing datasets collected from consortiums such as ABIDE and ADHD-200.

> Check back again tomorrow (20 Sept) for a more detailed analysis of this work!

Link to the paper can be found [here](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-16431-6_42).

Link to the poster can be found [here](https://yihao001.github.io/publications/paper1900_poster.pdf).

Link to the code can be found [here](https://github.com/SCSE-Biomedical-Computing-Group/SHRED).

---

## References and acknowledgements

- Population icons created by Iconjam - Flaticon
- Citizens icons created by Flat Icons - Flaticon

Last Updated: 19 September 2022